[Music]
right well I might get myself into a
position here and on the red carpet I
don't think I need to introduce myself
do I but this is the last talk for the
day we will have a little bit of wrap up
after this and we will have a little
time to to reflect and maybe some
questions I know some of you will want
to get home but let's get cracking
because we've got about well probably 12
minutes is my talk maybe might go for 15
so don't panic if that thing goes over
so here we go the mathematics of weight
loss well let me start with this last
year I went surfing in Fiji and the
resort had a photographer following us
around taking all these photos which was
really great except that I couldn't help
but notice this somehow I'd managed to
become 5 kilograms overweight couldn't
believe my eyes so I did what they tell
you to do I ate less and I moved more
and within just three months I
discovered I'd lost 6 kilograms so then
I did what a normal person does I did
physics but anyone would do this I
graphed my weight and when I did the
linear regression
I discovered that lo and behold on
average I'd been losing 85 grams a day
which got me thinking in fact it got me
very curious about this question that
I've since discovered most people have
no clue about in fact they've never even
thought about this and to prove my point
I've made a little video on Bondi Beach
and the question was this when somebody
loses weight where does it go what does
it become how does it get out of your
body you're probably dumbstruck by the
question these people were so listen to
this where does it go where does the
weight go
well well I don't know I don't know that
I don't know the mysteries of science it
gets used up the universe another
dimension doesn't go anywhere it comes
over to me becomes nothing don't exist
anymore I guess that's a very good
question question what it fascinating
question what would you say it goes
right in the crapper mate sweat moisture
and sweat evaporates up a Bondi Beach
that's where I go
well basically you burn it up as energy
darkness is energy heat energy burnt in
energy yeah you got me there I'm not
quite sure mmm
so what the heck is going on we're in
the middle of an obesity epidemic I
don't need to tell you about it so why
don't these people know the answer to
this fundamental question because not
one of them was right and we do know the
answer this is not groundbreaking stuff
I'm about to tell you so let me just
remind you of a few things you do know
what's the chemical formula for water
h2o chemical formula for carbon dioxide
you all know it right so you know what
human fat is made of so what is the
chemical formula for human fat there is
such a thing believe it or not it's been
known since the 60s it's C 55 H 104 oh
six that's the chemical formula for the
average fat molecule in a human body
some of the molecules might have a few
more carbon atoms and a few more
hydrogen some might have less they all
have just six oxygen atoms that's very
important and helpful for later but this
is the average fat molecule hate c55
hate 104 oh six so let's be very clear
about this the difference between that
and that is C 55 H 1 Oh 406 I kid you
not
the difference between that and that
same thing c55 h1 Oh 406 so how does
this stuff get out of a human body well
here's the general equation looks pretty
sort of interesting slightly complicated
not if you've done some year 10
chemistry surely this is year 10
chemistry although well it's not really
but here's what it says fat plus oxygen
gives you carbon dioxide and water
that's what it becomes
and this biochemist have known this for
ages you inhale that you exhale that
that's what happens to it amazing now
that little arrow there is kind of
oversimplifying something called
biochemistry that's three years at
university and my apologies to the
biochemist so that men doubt
oversimplify but I'm trying to get to
the crunch it's really complicated it
doesn't just come out of you for no
reason you've got to do stuff eat less
move more what we'll come to that in a
minute but look when you want to lose
weight you want to lose kilograms that's
all kilograms all that stuff there so
what do people say heat it burns up as
energy because that's what we've been
telling them all this time and it's very
confusing because energy has different
units kilojoules or you might use
calories and yes that's heat that's
motion when you move or it's thinking
your brain needs energy or it's growing
but that's not where the fat goes so
what are we talking about here well let
me just show you a couple more things so
I've got some carbon dioxide here in its
frozen form we call it dry ice it's
carbon dioxide it has mass thing is
you're not used to seeing it but here's
some dry ice and it's heavy and if you
put it in water lo and behold it does
this cool thing in bubbles like you've
all seen that before
well that's carbon dioxide in water
that's what fat is kind of made out of
but it's not fat I'm not making fat that
is not fat
so how does that become fat well it
doesn't just like that it becomes sugar
first plants make fat well they start
the whole thing a plant takes six
molecules of carbon dioxide and six
molecules of water uses an amazing
chemical called chlorophyll holds them
together and then sunlight comes in and
finds those molecules together and it
becomes sugar c6h12o6 is glucose
fructose same formula c6h12o6 sucrose is
glucose plus fructose stuck together -
and h2o molecule so it's do the maths
c20 no 12h 2205 right well here some
this is sucrose plants make it and it's
this stuff joined together it's now got
chemical energy holding these molecules
together so they don't just fly around
like that and by the way if you drink
that 600 mil of lemon flavored soft
drink you'll get 17 teaspoons of this
stuff are in there I'll just quickly
show what that looks like here's 1 2 3 4
5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 right
so if you drink that it's the equivalent
of doing what I just did with the spoon
except munching it all down exactly the
same no difference so if you do do that
then what happens well let me explain
something else that I've been telling
kids for a little while and they get
this so when you eat food it's not in
your body straight away if you swallow
that sugar it's not in you yet so here's
a pool noodle right it's got a hole
running through it and here's an almond
and if we put the almond in there can go
all the way through and out the other
end
whoop-dee-doo here's another almond if I
put an almond in here is where's the
almond you would say the almonds in the
pool noodle okay but is it in the foam
that the pool noodle is made of no of
course not it's just in the hole that
runs through it that's food you swallow
food it's not in you it's in the hole
that runs from here to the back door
and getting food into you it's called
digestion so with this stuff you've got
to break the bond that's holding the
fructose to the glucose and as soon as
you do that then that stuff can cross
the barrier or internal skin and into
your body and then it can go around in
your blood
that's digestion but now it's not
metabolism yet it's got to go into your
cells and then you've got to burn it up
and if you don't burn it up if you eat
all that sugar after you've had your
three meals in the day your body doesn't
waste it doesn't come out here the stuff
that comes out the back door was never
in you apart from a few molecules of
cholesterol
it's just fiber that you couldn't digest
plus the bacteria that live in your gut
you lose about 500 billion of those in
one single sitting they're tiny that's
many times the population of the earth
every time you flush the toilet it's
amazing
but that stuff was never really in you
so here's what happens if you don't then
metabolize that sugar well then it's
going to get converted into the stuff
that we all have a problem with fat now
better just prove that you do breathe
breathe this stuff out right if you
metabolize sugar you turn it back into
carbon dioxide and water so every time
you exhale out comes a bit of carbon
dioxide you can't see it this is the
problem this is why people don't know
how you lose weight so there you go of
traps and breath I've inhaled that 5% of
the air in there is now carbon dioxide
because it's come out of my lungs I've
got some liquid nitrogen here and I'm
going to use that to freeze this air
liquid nitrogen is minus 196 very handy
um where did I write that
in fact I'll just pour it straight on so
be a little bit careful with this stuff
I use it all the time if I look a little
blase I don't mean to it's please
respect this stuff if you play with it
the way you would respect boiling hot
water now if you pour it onto a balloon
the balloon does not pop which is
incredible the nitrogen is minus 196
oxygen turns into a liquid at minus 183
so the oxygen in the balloon is turning
into liquid carbon dioxide turns solid
I've got a big bowl of it there but it
turns solid at minus 78 so in the
balloon now I have frozen well I have
liquefied oxygen and frozen carbon
dioxide I'm gonna take it out you'll see
them so I'll just take a while for the
balloon to go a little bit clear at the
top the nitrogen in here
air is 79% nitrogen the nitrogen is in
the top of the balloon but now look at
that liquid down there can you see that
that's the oxygen from my breath that I
hadn't used but once it's all gone
there'll be some white powder left right
the white powder is breakfast that's the
carbon dioxide the carbon atoms I ate in
the last 24 hours and when I blow on
them they get warm enough to turn back
into gas and they vanish and people
think there's nothing in the balloon the
balloon has mass those atoms have mass
you can see carbon dioxide has mass when
you solidified but when you breathe it
out you don't see it and we've been
confusing people by talking about
kilojoules or calories and they're
really important but people do not seem
to understand that when you lose weight
you're losing atoms you can't just turn
atoms into nothing in fact science
teachers out there you need to change
the way you teach chemistry because
those people and many in this room think
that you can turn atoms into energy well
it's one of the founding principles of
modern chemistry you cannot turn an atom
into pure energy it's called the
conservation of mass before a reaction
and after a reaction we teach kids
you've got to have the same number of
atoms
it's called stoichiometry well we
haven't been teaching it very well at
all because people think you can turn
fat which is kilograms into nothing or
just kilojoules can't do it so he
was my big fat question I'm a physicist
I knew that bit but my question was if
I've got 10 kilograms of this stuff then
how much carbon dioxide does that become
and how much water and turns out that
that's really simple - this is year 10
chemistry and year 10 maths you need the
periodic table of elements you have to
look up hydrogen carbon and oxygen there
they are now
the periodic table has some important
information on it the weight of a single
atom of these elements so the weight of
a single atom of carbon is twelve point
zero zero one zero one one atomic mass
units doesn't matter what they are in
kilograms just yet I'll show you why in
a minute we've got 55 of those in a
average fat molecule so there's six
hundred sixty point five nine what about
the hydrogen okay there's a hundred and
four of those so we have in one molecule
of fat 104 point eight three atomic mass
units okay great the oxygen is a little
trickier this stumped me for quite some
time in fact I rang around and I
couldn't get a very clear answer on this
because it doesn't seem that many
biochemists have thought about it this
way that's not because they're silly or
whatever they just haven't thought about
it in this way which really surprised me
because this bit of information is the
most motivating bit of information I had
in my personal little journey of losing
seventeen kilograms in six months it's
all gone breathe it out amazing
you could anyone can do this it's not
hard so how much carbon dioxide and
water well the oxygen is important
there's six atoms of it in a molecule
but what are they going to become are
they gonna go out as carbon dioxide are
they gonna go as water are they going
some ratio of the two how do you figure
this out took me ages and then the
answer turned up in a very old paper
from the 1940s where they'd taken water
labelled the oxygen atoms made them put
some an isotope of oxygen on to those
and oxygen 18 gave it to mice the mice
had it go in their belly but then it
came out in their breath so water had
the oxygen in it but then that oxygen
turned up in the exhaled breath which
showed that oxygen atoms are exchanged
between
carbon dioxide molecules and water
molecules there's a really good reason
for that here's some phenylthaline in
water it's a bit hard to pronounce it's
got a bit murky because I've left it sit
but look if your barn here changes color
great whoop-dee-doo what does it show
you show you the carbon dioxide
dissolves in water forms carbonic acid
there's an exchange of oxygen atoms so
what this told me is that the way these
six atoms are going to leave your body
is in the same ratio that they exist in
the molecule so that's a two to one
ratio so that means four will go out as
carbon dioxide and two go it is water
that's great now I know the answer so
now you do the maths so we've got the
first two answers I'm gonna add to the
carbons the weight of four of these
oxygen atoms they're gonna go out with
carbon so check that up there and I've
got two to go so two times that there we
go check that with the hydrogen's
because they're gonna go out with some
hydrogen and now I can figure out the
ratio of carbon dioxide and water from
my fat so there's the totals and now
we've just got to divide it by the total
total and you get 84% will go out as
carbon dioxide and 16% will go out as
water so here's the answer then to my
big fat question 84% of fat is exhaled
16% is excreted as water somehow it can
be in your urine and your feces sweat
that means that 10 kilograms of fat
becomes eight point four kilograms of
invisible gas that you breathe out
that's amazing every time you're doing
some exercise and your breathing rate
goes up you're losing more weight than
when you're sitting down and not
breathing as rapidly and one point six
kilograms will come out as water now we
don't know if that comes out in your poo
or in your where and your sweater in
your tears because you cry a lot who
knows
but now I've got some frequently asked
questions that I need to answer because
there's lots of them well there's three
main ones one can I just surround a
breathe more everyone asks me straight
away well you can't sit around and
breathe more but it's called
hyperventilation you've got a coax 4c 55
h1 Oh 406 out of the fat cells they're
called adipocytes and to do it
biochemistry made it amazing what really
goes on it's a long story but you need
to get them out by first of all moving
more or eating less you've got to sort
of starve yourself of energy so that you
start turning these big molecules of fat
they get broken into three fatty acids
each they're called a triglyceride but
they have to be broken apart before they
can come out of the cells the
hidey-holes that they live in in your
bingo wings or you have double chins or
your butter your muffin tops or wherever
it is it's hanging around in there it's
not going to come out until this hormone
breaks them apart into its fatty acids
it goes into your bloodstream and then
you can oxidize them beta oxidation big
long story really complicated amazing
that we know but FAQ number two is does
weight loss cause climate change well
this is another really disturbing little
thing because it means people don't
understand climate change they just
don't because if you did you wouldn't
even think that but people think so why
doesn't it cause climate change because
food was made by plants just in the last
couple of years and the way it did it
was it took sunlight and glued water to
carbon dioxide when you eat you're
actually the energy is sunlight it was
put there by the Sun if I wasn't well
I'm not a hippie but I just about am
because I think that this is amazing you
eat sunlight that's the energy that you
get but it's modern sunlight when you
burn fossil fuels that's ancient
sunlight it's locked up in the ground as
carbon in wood Deadwood ancient
fossilized coal and oil is ancient dead
fossilized critters that lived in the
sea that photosynthesize that died that
got buried that eventually turned it all
this does not cause climate change and
the fact that people don't know that
means we need to teach them more about
climate change no wonder there are so
many myths
about both these things there are myths
about weight loss there are so many diet
gurus out there mate if they didn't know
this are you gonna trust anything else
they have to say to you no hopefully not
stop buying their books that pills their
rubbish why did you not know this until
today I don't know the answer but it
certainly makes me very very skeptical
about any health claim that anyone makes
who's supposedly a guru the third
question that you don't get asked but I
should get asked that I don't get asked
at all except the biochemist would be
sitting there wondering it right now did
you take into account ketosis and no not
really I did not
ketosis is when you starve yourself of
carbohydrates when there's no glucose in
your blood and you can do this thing
called ketogenesis your liver does it
and can convert fat molecules into
ketone bodies there acetone is one of
them you go to a nail shop get your nail
polish removed acetone right your body
makes that stuff but you don't want to
make it in huge quantities because you
go into acidosis so I'm not going to
comment on whether or not eating low
protein diets is a good idea because I'm
not an expert on that I would say that
I'd be careful because it's linked to
depression apparently in some papers I
don't know I'm not making any health
claims about low protein diets what I'm
saying is that this is very simple if
you just do what I did and what lots and
lots and lots of other people I don't
want to meddle it's easy all you have to
do to lose weight is turn it into carbon
dioxide and water and to do that all you
have to do is eat less move more and
keep reading thank you
you